Step 1: Assessment Figure 5-3 – Ask “Are you choking?” Ask: “Are you choking?”. (See figure 5-3) If the casualty is choking, the casualty will not be able to speak, breathe or cough but may nod his/her head. Tell the casualty that you can help. Note:  If the casualty is able to cough, instruct the casualty to cough as hard as possible. If casualty is unable to cough, perform the Heimlich Manoeuvre. Step 2: Position of rescuer If the casualty is standing, the rescuer stands behind the casualty. If the casualty is sitting, the rescuer kneels and positions himself/herself behind the casualty. Figure 5-4 – Stand or kneel behind the casualty. Step 3: Locate the landmark Put your arms around the casualty’s abdomen. Locate the navel. Place 2 fingers above the navel (see figure 5-5) and well below the tip of xiphoid process. Figure 5-5 – Place 2 fingers above the navel and make a fist with the other hand with the thumb in the palm.  Make a fist with the other hand with the thumb in the palm. (See figure 5-6) Figure 5-6 – Place the fist 2 fingers above the navel. Place the thumb side of the fist against the casualty’s abdomen in the midline and just above the 2 fingers’ spacing. (See figure 5-6) Step 4: Heimlich Manoeuvre Lean the casualty forward with one hand, while maintaining the fist against the abdomen. (See figure 5-7) Grasp your fist with your other hand. Figure 5-7 – Lean the casualty forward. Give quick inward and upward abdominal thrusts in one motion into the casualty’s abdomen. (See figure 5-8) Deliver each abdominal thrust firmly and distinctly with the intent of relieving the obstruction. Perform continuous abdominal thrusts until the foreign body is expelled or the casualty becomes unconscious. Figure 5-8 – Give quick inward and upward abdominal thrusts Note:  Usually, this procedure will force the foreign object out of the throat and the airway obstruction will be relieved.   To treat one’s own complete FBAO, the casualty makes a fist with one hand, places the thumb-side on the abdomen above the navel (2 fingers’ breadth) and below the xiphoid process, grasps the fist with the other, and then presses inward and upward toward the diaphragm with a quick motion.  If unsuccessful, the casualty can also press the upper abdomen over any firm surface such as the back of a chair, side of a table or porch railing. Several abdominal thrusts may be needed to clear the airway.  This technique is used as an alternative for obese or pregnant casualties. Step 1: Assessment Ask: “Are you choking?” (See figure 5-9) If the casualty is choking, the casualty will not be able to speak, breathe or cough but may nod his/her head. Tell the casualty that you can help. Step 2: Position of rescuer Figure 5-9 – Ask “Are you choking?” If the casualty is standing, the rescuer stands behind the casualty. If the casualty is sitting, the rescuer kneels and positions himself/herself behind the casualty. Step 3: Location of landmark Place your arms under the casualty’s armpits encircling the chest. (See figure 5-10) Make a fist with one hand with the thumb in the palm. (See 5-11) Place thumb-side of fist on the middle of the casualty’s sternum (breastbone). (See figure 5-12) Figure 5-11 – Making a fist with thumb in the palm Figure 5-10 – Place arms under the casualty’s armpits encircling the chest Figure 5-12 – Place thumb-side of fist on the middle of the casualty’s sternum   Grasp your fist with your other hand and bring yourself close to the casualty before giving quick backward thrusts. (See figure 5-13) Figure 5-13 – Give quick backward thrusts Deliver each backward thrust firmly and distinctly. Perform continuous backward chest thrusts with the intent of relieving the obstruction until the foreign body is expelled or the casualty becomes unconscious.  If the casualty becomes unconscious, proceed with the following steps. Step 1: Position the casualty Support and position the casualty lying on his/her back on a firm flat surface. (See figure 5-14) Figure 5-14 – Support the casualty Step 2: Activate the Emergency Medical Service (EMS) Rescuer shouts: “Help! Call ambulance 995 and get an AED!” (see figure 5-15) However, if there is another person around, ask him/her to call 995 for SCDF EMS and get an AED. Figure 5-15 – Get help! Step 3: Start 30 chest compressions Locate the landmark and perform 30 chest compressions using the same location and techniques used for chest compressions in CPR. (Refer to Adult CPR, page 17 to 26; or Child CPR, page 48 to 53) (See figure 5-16) Figure 5-16 – Perform chest compressions using the same location and techniques as CPR   Perform the Head-Tilt, Chin-lift manoeuvre to open the airway. While maintaining head tilt, open the mouth gently to check for visible foreign bodies. If no foreign body is seen, perform another 30 chest compressions. (See figure 5-16) If a foreign body is seen, maintain the open airway with the Head-Tilt, Chin-Lift manoeuvre (see figure 5-17) and insert the index finger of your other hand into the casualty’s mouth along the inside of the cheek. Use a hooking action to dislodge the foreign body and manoeuvre it out of the mouth. Take care not to force the foreign body deeper into the throat. This manoeuvre is known as the finger sweep. (See figure 5-18) Figure 5-17 – Head-tilt and chin-lift manoeuvre Figure 5-18 –Finger sweep Note:  Do not perform blind finger sweep. Blind finger sweep may push the object back or further into the airway.  However, if there are no objects found in the mouth, repeat steps 3 and 4 until object has been removed.  For lay rescuers – Once object has been removed, check for breathing. If breathing is absent, repeat steps 3 and 4 until breathing resumes or emergency help arrives. For trained healthcare providers – See step 5.  Step 5: Bag-valve-mask (BVM) ventilation Figure 5-19 – Provide BVM ventilations Attempt one ventilation via BVM (1st ventilation). (see figure 5-19) If BVM is not available and you are willing and trained, you may provide mouth-to-mouth ventilations. o Perform a Head-Tilt, Chin-Lift manoeuvre. An open airway will ensure ventilations are effective. (See chapter 2) o Pinch the casualty’s nose with your index finger and thumb; and seal your lips around the casualty’s mouth. o Provide 1 breath by blowing steadily into the casualty’s mouth for about 1 second per breath, sufficient to make the chest visibly rise. o Release the nose after each breath. If there is no resistance, airway is clear. Check for normal breathing and pulse. If unsure of the presence of normal breathing and pulse within 10 seconds, start CPR. If there is resistance (i.e., the chest does not rise), the airway may be blocked. Reposition the casualty’s head with the Head-Tilt, Chin-Lift manoeuvre, and re-attempt to ventilate (2nd ventilation). Repeat steps 3 to 5 until help arrives and takes over or the casualty starts breathing, coughing, talking, or moving. Check for normal breathing and pulse. If normal breathing or pulse are absent or you are unsure, start CPR.  If pulse is definitely present but the casualty is not breathing, perform rescue breathing at a rate of 12 breaths per minute (one breath every 5 seconds) by giving one breath and counting 2-a-thousand, 3-a-thousand, 4-a-thousand, 5-a-thousand. For children, perform rescue breathing at a rate of 20 breaths per minute for 2 minutes (one breath every 3 seconds) by giving one breath and counting 2-a-thousand, 3-a-thousand. Repeat the sequence until you have completed a total of 12 breaths (for adult) or 20 breaths (for child). Re-assess for normal breathing and pulse.  If both the breathing and pulse are present, monitor the casualty till help arrives.  Figure 5-20 – Unconscious Adult/Child FBAO Relief for healthcare providers Note: 1. For healthcare providers, provide ventilations via a bag-valve-mask (BVM). If there is no BVM available and you are unable or unwilling to do mouth-to-mouth ventilations for any reason, check for normal breathing and pulse for not more than 10 seconds. 2. If no BVM is available and you are unable or unwilling to do mouth-to-mouth ventilations, perform continuous chest compressions. If you are a single rescuer and feeling tired, you may take a rest of not more than 10 seconds (preferably after 100 compressions). (Refer to Adult CPR, page 17 to 26; or Child CPR, page 48 to 53)  Infant Cardio-Pulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) 6.1: INFANT CPR Singapore Resuscitation and First Aid Council All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form or by any means, without prior written permission of the copyright owner. Rev 1 / 2022  This module addresses the care of infants with cardiac arrest, up to 1 year of age. Infants rarely collapse (goes into cardiac arrest) owing to a primary heart problem. Cardiac arrest is usually secondary to other events, such as respiratory illness or major trauma. Therefore, rescuers must detect and promptly treat early signs of respiratory and circulatory failure to prevent cardiac arrest. (D) Check for Danger Ensure that the rescuer operates in a safe environment. Resuscitation should start where the infant is found, unless the site is unsafe or unconducive (eg. roads which are still open to traffic, burning building, etc), then the infant should be removed to a safe, flat and open space as soon as possible. (R) Check for Responsiveness The rescuer should tap the infant’s shoulders and the sole of the feet and ask loudly: ‘Hello! Hello! Are you OK?’ (see figure 6-1). Avoid violent shaking of the infant as this may result in injury. Avoid unnecessary movements of the neck to prevent injuries to the head and neck. Figure 6-1 – Check for responsiveness For CPR to be effective, the infant must be lying on his/her back on a firm, flat surface. If the infant is lying face down (prone position), or on his/her side, rescuer will need to roll the infant over onto his/her back.   Look for the rise and fall of the chest (See figure 6-3). Do not take more than 10 seconds. Figure 6-3 – Look for rise and fall of chest It is important to recognize that gasping is NOT normal breathing but a sign of cardiac arrest. Start chest compressions immediately if you unsure whether the casualty has abnormal breathing or gasping. (See https://youtu.be/T85vd3CBs04 for video of contrast between gasping and normal breathing) For trained healthcare providers only Locate the brachial pulse (inner aspect of the upper arm, between the infant’s elbow and shoulder) with the index and middle fingers. Apply gentle pressure and feel for the pulse at the same time as checking for normal breathing. (See figure 6-4) Checking for normal breathing and pulse should not take more than 10 seconds. Figure 6-4 – Check brachial pulse and normal breathing If unsure about the presence of pulse and normal breathing at the end of 10 seconds, assume cardiac arrest and commence chest compressions.   If the infant is unresponsive, shout to get help from bystanders to call 995 for SCDF EMS or activate the emergency response system (for in-facility/in-hospital cardiac arrest). (See figure 6-2) If alone, use a handphone to call 995 for SCDF and put on speaker phone mode. An SCDF emergency medical dispatcher can help a lay rescuer recognise cardiac arrest, and once this is established, the dispatcher will guide the rescuer to begin CPR by providing instructions on how to perform Chest Compressions via a handphone. In a situation where a lone rescuer found an unresponsive infant in a remote area with no accessibility to activate emergency medical service, it is necessary for the lone rescuer to assess the infant’s responsiveness and breathing. If normal breathing is absent, CPR (chest compressions and ventilations) should commence immediately and continued for at least two minutes before leaving the infant to seek nearby assistance or obtain phone access and return to the infant immediately to continue CPR. However, in the process, if there is another person around, ask him/her to call 995 for SCDF EMS and get an AED. Figure 6-2 – Get help (A) Ask someone to get an AED Ask someone to get an AED if there is one within a 60-second walking distance. The SCDF emergency medical dispatcher may be able to locate the nearest AED and summon help from CPR-trained rescuers in the vicinity. However, if you are the lone rescuer, do not leave the casualty.   Site of chest compression should be at the centre of the chest at the lower half of the sternum (breastbone). Ensure adequate exposure of the chest. Locate the correct hand position for chest compressions: o Use your index finger to draw an imaginary line between the nipples to the centre of the sternum. (See figure 6-5) o Place your middle (third), and ring (fourth) fingers next to your index finger (see figure 6-6) on the center of the infant’s chest. o Lift up your index finger but maintain the middle and ring fingers on the sternum and commence chest compressions using the pulp of the fingers. (See figure 6-7) Figure 6-5 – Trace location Figure 6-6 – Place middle & ring fingers next to index finger Figure 6-7 – Prepare for chest compressions o Depth of chest compression for infants must be 1/3 the anterior-posterior diameter of the infant’s chest (about 3 to 4 cm). o The compression rate is 100–120 per minute. o Ensure complete recoil of the chest wall after each compression. Figure 6-8 – Compress the lower half of sternum 